README.md, before:

## event_logger_rails

`event_logger_rails` is a Rails engine for emitting structured events in logs during the execution of business processes for analysis and visualization.
It allows teams to define events in a simple, centralized configuration file, and then log those events in JSON format for further processing.

## Usage

You can define a registry of events your application emits via the config file (`config/event_logger_rails.yml`).
The events you define are placed in the config file under the corresponding environment. Most events belong in `shared`, though you may want to define different
events or event characteristics per environment.

For example, to register a user signup event, first define the event as a registered event. You must include a `description` for the event, and you may
optionally include a `level` to use for that specific event.

```yaml
shared:
  user:
    signup:
      success:
        description: 'Indicates a successful user signup.'
      failure:
        description: 'Indicates a user signup was not successful.'
        level: 'error'
```

### Logging in Controllers

Continuing this example, we'll want to log the events we registered. To do so, include the `EventLoggerRails::LoggableController` concern in the controller that
processes user signup's and call the `log_event` method to log details about the event:

```ruby
class UsersController < ApplicationController
  include EventLoggerRails::LoggableController

  def create
    user = User.new(user_params)
    if user.save
      log_event 'user.signup.success'
      redirect_to dashboard_path
    else
      log_event 'user.signup.failure', data: { errors: user.errors.full_messages  }
      render :new
    end
  end
end
```

In this example, a possible successful signup could be structured like this:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52659990d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "WARN",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "princess@leia.com",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.938+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.success",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was successful.",
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "action": "create",
  "controller": "Registrations"
}
```

...while a failed signup might look like this:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52656690d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "ERROR",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    },
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.928+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.failure",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was not successful.",
  "errors": [
    "Email can't be blank",
    "Password can't be blank"
  ],
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "action": "create",
  "controller": "Registrations"
}
```

Note how the log entry from the previous example contains the data passed in via the optional `data` argument.

You can also provide a logger level as an optional argument if you need to specify a logger level other than the default. If you provide a logger level, it
will override the configured event level and the default logger level.

```ruby
log_event 'user.signup.failure', level: :info, data: { errors: user.errors }
```

This will output an event with the corresponding severity level. You must provide a valid logger level (`:debug, :info, :warn, :error, or :unknown`).

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52656690d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "INFO",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    },
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.928+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.failure",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was not successful.",
  "errors": [
    "Email can't be blank",
    "Password can't be blank"
  ],
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "action": "create",
  "controller": "Registrations"
}
```

### Logging in Models

You can also log events from within models by including the `EventLoggerRails::LoggableModel` concern and calling `log_event`.

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  include EventLoggerRails::LoggableModel

  after_create :log_signup

  private

  def log_signup
    log_event 'user.signup.success', data: { email: }
  end
end
```

By default, `event_logger_rails` will include the model name, instance ID, and whatever data is passed.

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52652332d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "WARN",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "princess@leia.com",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.817+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.success",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was successful.",
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "model": "User",
  "instance_id": 41
}
```

### Logging Everywhere Else

You can log events from anywhere inside of your application by calling `EventLoggerRails.log` directly, though you won't get the additional context
from the controller or model.

```ruby
EventLoggerRails.log 'user.signup.success', level: :info, data: { user_id: @user.id }
```

### Errors

There are two expected errors which are handled by `event_logger_rails`: an unregistered event and an invalid logger level. Both will result
in a log entry with an event corresponding to the error, and the severity level will be set to `ERROR`.

If you fail to register an event, the logger will emit an `event_logger_rails.event.unregistered` event:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "94c5ffe9-1bd8-4e04-88a3-478958e242b0",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "ERROR",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T07:03:34.993+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "event_logger_rails.event.unregistered",
  "event_description": "Indicates provided event was unregistered.",
  "message": "Event provided not registered: foo.bar"
}
```

If you provide an invalid log level, the logger will emit an `event_logger_rails.logger_level.invalid` event:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "11541423-0008-4cc7-aef7-1e4af9a801d7",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "ERROR",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T07:04:52.623+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "event_logger_rails.logger_level.invalid",
  "event_description": "Indicates provided level was invalid.",
  "message": "Invalid logger level provided: 'foobar'. Valid levels: :debug, :info, :warn, :error, :unknown."
}
```

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'event_logger_rails'
```

And then execute:

```bash
bundle
```

Or install it yourself as:

```bash
gem install event_logger_rails
```

Run the install generator to create a config file (`config/event_logger_rails.yml`):

```bash
bin/rails generate event_logger_rails:install
```

Add your events to the generated config file following the structure of the examples.

You can specify a default level `event_logger_rails` will use if a level is not included in the call to the logger or configured as a default for the provided event.
This default level is set to `:warn` unless otherwise specified.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.default_level = :info
end
```

You can configure a custom formatter. Reference `EventLoggerRails::Formatters::JSON` for an example.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.formatter = 'MyCustomFormatterClass'
end
```

By default, `event_logger_rails` outputs to a separate log file (`log/event_logger_rails.#{Rails.env}.log`) from normal Rails log output, allowing
you to ingest these logs independently. If you wish to set an alternative log device to capture output, you can configure it in `config/application.rb`:

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.logdev = 'path/to/log.file'
end
```

Some platforms require logging output to be sent to $STDOUT. You can configure this as an output device easily enough.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.logdev = $stdout
end
```

You can configure a custom logger. Reference `EventLoggerRails::EventLogger` for an example.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.logger_class = 'MyCustomLoggerClass'
end
```

You can also configure the Rails logger to use `EventLoggerRails::EventLogger` to render structured logs in JSON format with the additional app and request data.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do
  config.colorize_logging = false
  config.log_level = ENV.fetch('RAILS_LOG_LEVEL', :info)
  logger = EventLoggerRails::EventLogger.new($stdout)
  config.logger = ActiveSupport::TaggedLogging.new(logger)
end
```

## Contributing

Your inputs echo in this realm. Venture forth and materialize your thoughts through a PR.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

Add note about structured event reporting (#53)

README.md, after:

## event_logger_rails

`event_logger_rails` is a Rails engine for emitting structured events in logs during the execution of business processes for analysis and visualization.
It allows teams to define events in a simple, centralized configuration file, and then log those events in JSON format for further processing.

Note: Rails 8.1 has introduced [structure event reporting](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/8_1_release_notes.html#structured-event-reporting). This is the preferred method of emitting structured events moving forward, and you should transition to using it instead of `event_logger_rails`. This project will no longer receive updates.

## Usage

You can define a registry of events your application emits via the config file (`config/event_logger_rails.yml`).
The events you define are placed in the config file under the corresponding environment. Most events belong in `shared`, though you may want to define different
events or event characteristics per environment.

For example, to register a user signup event, first define the event as a registered event. You must include a `description` for the event, and you may
optionally include a `level` to use for that specific event.

```yaml
shared:
  user:
    signup:
      success:
        description: 'Indicates a successful user signup.'
      failure:
        description: 'Indicates a user signup was not successful.'
        level: 'error'
```

### Logging in Controllers

Continuing this example, we'll want to log the events we registered. To do so, include the `EventLoggerRails::LoggableController` concern in the controller that
processes user signup's and call the `log_event` method to log details about the event:

```ruby
class UsersController < ApplicationController
  include EventLoggerRails::LoggableController

  def create
    user = User.new(user_params)
    if user.save
      log_event 'user.signup.success'
      redirect_to dashboard_path
    else
      log_event 'user.signup.failure', data: { errors: user.errors.full_messages  }
      render :new
    end
  end
end
```

In this example, a possible successful signup could be structured like this:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52659990d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "WARN",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "princess@leia.com",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.938+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.success",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was successful.",
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "action": "create",
  "controller": "Registrations"
}
```

...while a failed signup might look like this:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52656690d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "ERROR",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    },
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.928+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.failure",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was not successful.",
  "errors": [
    "Email can't be blank",
    "Password can't be blank"
  ],
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "action": "create",
  "controller": "Registrations"
}
```

Note how the log entry from the previous example contains the data passed in via the optional `data` argument.

You can also provide a logger level as an optional argument if you need to specify a logger level other than the default. If you provide a logger level, it
will override the configured event level and the default logger level.

```ruby
log_event 'user.signup.failure', level: :info, data: { errors: user.errors }
```

This will output an event with the corresponding severity level. You must provide a valid logger level (`:debug, :info, :warn, :error, or :unknown`).

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52656690d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "INFO",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    },
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.928+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.failure",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was not successful.",
  "errors": [
    "Email can't be blank",
    "Password can't be blank"
  ],
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "action": "create",
  "controller": "Registrations"
}
```

### Logging in Models

You can also log events from within models by including the `EventLoggerRails::LoggableModel` concern and calling `log_event`.

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  include EventLoggerRails::LoggableModel

  after_create :log_signup

  private

  def log_signup
    log_event 'user.signup.success', data: { email: }
  end
end
```

By default, `event_logger_rails` will include the model name, instance ID, and whatever data is passed.

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "2b8f44c1-0e42-4a5f-84b8-52652332d138",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "WARN",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "princess@leia.com",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T06:47:16.817+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "user.signup.success",
  "event_description": "Indicates a user signup was successful.",
  "email": "princess@leia.com",
  "model": "User",
  "instance_id": 41
}
```

### Logging Everywhere Else

You can log events from anywhere inside of your application by calling `EventLoggerRails.log` directly, though you won't get the additional context
from the controller or model.

```ruby
EventLoggerRails.log 'user.signup.success', level: :info, data: { user_id: @user.id }
```

### Errors

There are two expected errors which are handled by `event_logger_rails`: an unregistered event and an invalid logger level. Both will result
in a log entry with an event corresponding to the error, and the severity level will be set to `ERROR`.

If you fail to register an event, the logger will emit an `event_logger_rails.event.unregistered` event:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "94c5ffe9-1bd8-4e04-88a3-478958e242b0",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "ERROR",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T07:03:34.993+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "event_logger_rails.event.unregistered",
  "event_description": "Indicates provided event was unregistered.",
  "message": "Event provided not registered: foo.bar"
}
```

If you provide an invalid log level, the logger will emit an `event_logger_rails.logger_level.invalid` event:

```json
{
  "environment": "development",
  "format": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded;charset=UTF-8",
  "host": "d6aeb6b0516c",
  "id": "11541423-0008-4cc7-aef7-1e4af9a801d7",
  "service_name": "DummyApp",
  "level": "ERROR",
  "method": "POST",
  "parameters": {
    "authenticity_token": "[FILTERED]",
    "user": {
      "email": "",
      "password": "[FILTERED]"
    }
  },
  "path": "/users",
  "remote_ip": "172.20.0.1",
  "timestamp": "2023-09-30T07:04:52.623+00:00",
  "event_identifier": "event_logger_rails.logger_level.invalid",
  "event_description": "Indicates provided level was invalid.",
  "message": "Invalid logger level provided: 'foobar'. Valid levels: :debug, :info, :warn, :error, :unknown."
}
```

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'event_logger_rails'
```

And then execute:

```bash
bundle
```

Or install it yourself as:

```bash
gem install event_logger_rails
```

Run the install generator to create a config file (`config/event_logger_rails.yml`):

```bash
bin/rails generate event_logger_rails:install
```

Add your events to the generated config file following the structure of the examples.

You can specify a default level `event_logger_rails` will use if a level is not included in the call to the logger or configured as a default for the provided event.
This default level is set to `:warn` unless otherwise specified.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.default_level = :info
end
```

You can configure a custom formatter. Reference `EventLoggerRails::Formatters::JSON` for an example.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.formatter = 'MyCustomFormatterClass'
end
```

By default, `event_logger_rails` outputs to a separate log file (`log/event_logger_rails.#{Rails.env}.log`) from normal Rails log output, allowing
you to ingest these logs independently. If you wish to set an alternative log device to capture output, you can configure it in `config/application.rb`:

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.logdev = 'path/to/log.file'
end
```

Some platforms require logging output to be sent to $STDOUT. You can configure this as an output device easily enough.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.logdev = $stdout
end
```

You can configure a custom logger. Reference `EventLoggerRails::EventLogger` for an example.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do |config|
  config.event_logger_rails.logger_class = 'MyCustomLoggerClass'
end
```

You can also configure the Rails logger to use `EventLoggerRails::EventLogger` to render structured logs in JSON format with the additional app and request data.

```ruby
Rails.application.configure do
  config.colorize_logging = false
  config.log_level = ENV.fetch('RAILS_LOG_LEVEL', :info)
  logger = EventLoggerRails::EventLogger.new($stdout)
  config.logger = ActiveSupport::TaggedLogging.new(logger)
end
```

## Contributing

Your inputs echo in this realm. Venture forth and materialize your thoughts through a PR.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
